Added blog post on dedicated clusters (#244)
xataio/mdx-blog: dedicated-postgres-clusters.mdx

author: Simona Pencea, Matt Field
date: 3-22-2024
tags: ['engineering']
published: true
slug: postgres-dedicated-clusters
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/cover-dedicated-clusters.jpg
---

Today we are excited to announce dedicated clusters! Dedicated clusters provide better scalability, security and noisy neighbor isolation, as well as better economics at scale for your Postgres databases on Xata. We are rolling this out in an Early Access Program (EAP) and you can [request access starting today](https://5i8caik7lja.typeform.com/to/Gh5lin22).

![Postgres branches allocated to shared and dedicated clusters](images/branches-clusters.png)

The key features of dedicated clusters are:

- Xata databases and branches can be allocated to a dedicated cluster. You can allocate a single branch (for example, only your production branch) or multiple branches (for example, all your development branches).
- You'll be able to move Postgres databases between dedicated clusters with no or minimal downtime.
- You can configure dedicated clusters with a configurable number of read replicas, and you can ask for them to be in different availability zones.

> - You can choose between a wide range of [instance types](https://xata.io/docs/dedicated-cluster#provisioned-instances) or you can define a minimum and maximum CPU/RAM configuration and let [auto-scaling](https://xata.io/docs/dedicated-cluster#auto-scaling-instances) choose the right size dynamically based on load. Scaling up is almost instant and scaling down is done automatically in a matter of minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can choose between a wide range of [instance types](/docs/dedicated-cluster#provisioned-instances) or you can define a minimum and maximum CPU/RAM configuration and let [auto-scaling](/docs/dedicated-cluster#auto-scaling-instances) choose the right size dynamically based on load. Scaling up is almost instant and scaling down is done automatically in a matter of minutes.
```

Reviewer: converted links to relative

- The per-GB cost of storage is significantly cheaper (20 times less!) than the storage cost for shared clusters.

> - The dedicated clusters are free from limitations we impose on our shared clusters to protect from abuse: rate and concurrency limits as well as some limitations on the SQL commands you can execute. You can see a comparison table in the [docs](https://xata.io/docs/postgres#supported-statements).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A dedicated cluster is free from all limitations we impose on our shared clusters to protect from abuse: [rate and concurrency limits](/docs/rest-api/limits) as well as some limitations on the [SQL commands](/docs/postgres#supported-statements) you can execute.
```

Reviewer: shortened the sentence a bit, added a link to rate limits and made links relative.

Before we dive into the specifics of dedicated clusters, let's take a step back and provide some insight into our current architecture so you can understand the difference and the importance of having optionality.

## Shared cell architecture

Xata has a **cell-based architecture**, in which each cell consists of a Postgres Aurora cluster, an Elasticsearch cluster, a queue, and the associated services that serve the Data API, the SQL wire protocol, and more. The cells form our data plane where we serve our users through our Data API and the Postgres wire protocol.

> We have several cells in one region and each of them is multi-tenant. Essentially, they are being shared between several users, which allows us to offer a generous [free tier](https://xata.io/blog/serverless-postgres-platform#the-free-tier) (15GB of storage, HA included, no pausing) and in general a very good offering for “small scale”. Having this cell-splitting system in a region ensures that one noisy neighbor will not affect the whole region. It will, however, affect the cell they live in. In order to mitigate the noisy neighbor issues, we have rate limits and concurrency limits in place and we are monitoring for abuse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have several cells in one region and each of them is multi-tenant. Essentially, they are being shared between several users, which allows us to offer a generous [free tier](/blog/serverless-postgres-platform#the-free-tier) (15GB of storage, HA included, no pausing) and in general a very good offering for “small scale”. Having this cell-splitting system in a region ensures that one noisy neighbor will not affect the whole region. It will, however, affect the cell they live in. In order to mitigate the noisy neighbor issues, we have rate limits and concurrency limits in place and we are monitoring for abuse.
```

Under the hood, we use Kubernetes to manage both infrastructure and networking via [Crossplane](https://www.crossplane.io/), a CNCF project for building and managing control planes. The configuration and desired state of this infrastructure are stored in Kubernetes as custom definitions backed by Crossplane, and it falls to Crossplane to call the relevant APIs and reconcile this desired state with AWS.

All of the supporting Xata cell services are uniquely created on a per-cell basis for dedicated clusters, and these also run in Kubernetes. These are created and managed alongside the infrastructure that Crossplane manages. These services are not shared between every dedicated cluster within a workspace but serve traffic only to that single dedicated cluster, allowing more granular control over considerations like traffic management, scaling, and deployments.

> ## Dedicated Clusters Challenges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Challenges
```

Another thing that comes out of the asynchronous behavior is the need to have notifications when things are ready - or failed, but let's be optimistic. We are relying on notifications to tell us when the clusters are running, or in a stopped state.

### Cluster state machine

Even without explicitly planning to, we kept talking about cluster states a couple of times. It comes natural to think about the dedicated cluster as going from one state to another, moved by different events, until it reaches a final state - **Running**, **Failure**, **Stopped**, or **Terminated**.

We added a state machine in code to deal with cluster states. The actual code could have happily existed on its own, but adding this layer of abstraction has made explaining how things work and adding new states to the state machine a lot easier.

### Allocating branches to a dedicated cluster

Well this was fun, we managed to create a dedicated cluster on demand! But that is not our end goal. Our end goal is that we are able to use a dedicated cluster seamlessly as if it were a shared cluster.

> The main issue here is that with shared clusters, we have our own allocation algorithm that, on branch creation, checks what cell is the most empty and sends the branch to that cell (or cluster). With dedicated clusters, we don't want that. As a user, I want to tell Xata “create a branch on this cluster I just created for myself” and have the allocation algorithm point to that. So what we needed was to have an “on-demand” allocation as well, along with “on-demand cell/cluster creation”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main issue here is that with shared clusters, we have our own allocation algorithm that, on branch creation, checks what cell is the most empty and sends the branch to that cell (or cluster). With dedicated clusters, we don't want that. As a user, I want to tell Xata "create a branch on this cluster I just created for myself" and have the allocation algorithm point to that. So what we needed was to have an "on-demand" allocation as well, along with "on-demand cell/cluster creation".
```

Reviewer: replaced the docs double quotes with the standard ones :)
